---
path: "/the-inflection-point-for-bi-platforms"
date: "2018-01-01"
title: "The Inflection Point for BI Platforms"
description: "The CRM industry has already begun verticalization, with the success of Veeva. The BI industry is set to be verticalized too, starting with marketing."
robots: "index, follow"
tags: ["growth"]
headerImg: "https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/s/kgzdpdwyr3gn7az/bg1.svg?dl=1"
---

The recent story from
[WSJ](https://www.wsj.com/articles/stop-using-excel-finance-chiefs-tell-staffs-1511346601)
on Finance Chiefs asking their teams to move away from Excel generated a lot of
buzz with folks debating the article with a lot of passion on Twitter and other
channels, so much so that WSJ had to publish a follow-up to the article
presenting the dissenting voice!

I personally found the debate to be somewhat perplexing since most industries
have already moved away from Excel which is a horizontal solution to deeper
vertical solutions. Most sales teams used to use spreadsheets as a rudimentary
CRM before the CRM Industry took off and solutions like Salesforce came along.
CRM choices are now debated with vertical solutions, not Excel! Same with ATS or
Applicant Tracking System. Can you imagine going back from a dedicated solution
like Lever or Greenhouse to Excel?

Just as Excel is being disrupted by vertical solutions, another industry which
will start seeing disruption is the BI Industry. BI is an all-encompassing term
to centralize all the KPI’s a co. needs to track but not only is it being used
as an Executive level dashboarding solution, but also by vertical heads to
streamline more granular data at a customized vertical level like HR, Finance,
Marketing, Sales etc and to customize it for each business vertical requires a
small army of analysts + engineers to build and deploy.

To see how the BI Industry might evolve let’s look at the CRM Industry and how
the industry has changed over the years.

The CRM industry essentially started with Siebel. Early naysayers called the CRM
a “glorified database” which while technically accurate completely missed the
value of context and workflows.

![Illustration showing the evolution of CRM systems](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*8bW2MgUia_mhecKo.png "The Evolution of CRM Systems")

The next inflection point was the launch of Salesforce which was the first
cloud-based solution and this was seminal in so many ways. Not only was it a big
shift in the CRM Industry, it also created SaaS as a viable business concept and
shifted the way the Industry looked at selling licenses and established the
Internet as a viable distribution channel.

While we have seen multiple CRM solutions at various ends of the Market the next
big shift happened with verticalization in the CRM space. An example for this is
Veeva which took the Salesforce platform and customized it for the healthcare
industry, taking context to the next level of granularity and applying it not
just at a business function level but at an industry level.

We are at a similar point of inflection for BI Platforms

![Illustration showing the evolution of BI systems](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*HsgW8hlAzNmE6bOv.png "The Evolution of BI Systems")

With the launch of DOMO, we started seeing the move to cloud solutions from
desktop licenses which is why I think we are close to the next stage of
inflection which will be vertical intelligence solutions for different business
functions.

One industry I am bullish on is Marketing. Most of the innovation in the
Marketing space has been around new ways of targeting and customer acquisition
and not enough on data consumption. Marketers continue to use Spreadsheets and
generic BI systems for data consumption which have been sold to CIO’s and
deployed by Analysts. The channels and sources have grown exponentially from
just desktop traffic and search to social, push, mobile etc. The tools available
to manage this data have not fundamentally changed at all.

When I started working in this space in 2005, it was hard to get folks with
knowledge of digital marketing so we would hire people from traditional
Marketing backgrounds and teach them digital. Any knowledge of SQL was
considered a nice-to-have but it was very clear that we were hiring folks based
on the depth of their Marketing skills, now we are hiring what I call the “full
stack marketer” who not only knows SQL but can also write and deploy code, work
with product teams and some knowledge of Marketing is a plus!

You know how acute the problem is when you see folks at PPC forums asking
questions like these.

![Snapshot of a comment from Reddit forums asking if PPC analysis is possible on more than 2 axes](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/0*YmuCL1T-UGzUgH4Y.png "Should marketers be worrying about R, ggplot and multiple axes?")

The value of vertical solutions can be seen by the success of Google Data Studio
— unfortunately, it suffers the same limitations of other platforms the minute
you need non-Google data sources.

This is where the opportunity exists for a well built vertical solution which
can tie all Marketing data together with none of the baggage of a generic
solution. A vertical solution will be less wide and a lot deeper. A vertical
solution will also be sold differently, unlike current BI solutions which are
sold to CIO’s, vertical solutions will sell to business heads. With Marketing
heads budget overtaking CIO’s this is almost the perfect storm of pressing
product need + budgets to pull this off.

This post was originally written on
_[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/inflection-point-bi-platforms-arun-srinivasan/)_
by _[Arun Srinivasan](https://www.linkedin.com/in/arun-srinivasan/)_, Founder
and CEO of _[Granular](https://granularhq.com/)_. Granular helps _[performance
marketers](https://granularhq.com/marketers.html)_ and _[digital
agencies](https://granularhq.com/agencies.html)_ eliminate the ETL process and
automate data collection, normalization and reporting for all advertising and
analytics channels. It also empowers you to get deep insights from marketing
data that can create long-term business impact.
